assembler reference manual

Summary

This is a one-pass assembler.
It reads an ASCII-text source file (stdin) and generates an ASCII-text relocatable file (stdout).
Optionally it generates an ASCII-text list file (--list option).
The relocatable file must be processed by the linker.

Options

-o --opcodes	specify file with opcode definitions

Directives

.byte		define a single byte in the generated code
.word		define a pair of bytes in the generated code
.equate		define a symbol and value, not part of the generated code

There is no directive to set a code origin. That is handled in the linker.

Symbol values may be absolute or relocatable.

Examples

.equate		LIMIT	1000

generates an absolute value. It is not adjusted when the code is relocated.

The code at the beginning of the file (that is, these bytes are at offset zero)

START	LXI	H, 2000

generates a relocated symbol for START.
If this is the first line of code, its unrelocated value is zero (0x0000).
When the code is relocated to build a memory image (by the linker), this symbol will be adjusted.
The later code:

	JMP	START

will leave the assembler with the value zero for START.
The linker will adjust it by the base value specified when running it.

Arguments such as addresses and numeric values may be defined by expressions.
Expressions are written in RPN notation, with values and operators separated by spaces.
Expressions with all constants are evaluated in the assembler.
Expressions with labels or addresses (both of which may be relocated) are evaluated in the linker.
Operators are limited to + (add), - (subtract), * (multiply), and / (integer divide).

Future

Specify exported symbols (and other symbols are not exported or available outside of this module).

.bytes directive to specify multiple bytes in the generated code
.words directive to specify multiple byte pairs in the generated code
.stringz directive to specify bytes as a text string, with NUL terminator added
.nstring directive to specify bytes as a text string, with length as first byte (does not include count, may be single zero byte)
